Congratulations on a really, very profoundly moving book, I have to say.
Thank you.
I read it in one sitting, which is probably the way it's meant to be read, would you think?
Well, that shows, if you do that, that shows an enormous interest.
I know when I read a book in one sitting, it's because I can't put it down, so that's
wonderful, but I guess whatever way you read it would be.
I hadn't really thought of how it would be for the reader.
Yeah, well, I know, of course, I read a lot of books, and I do it professionally, but there just seemed to be a continuity here, an incremental kind of a power that just seemed
appropriate to read it that way.
That's just an opening comment.
And, of course, in preparing for this interview, I read as much background as I could on your night, and I'm struck by the use of the name Richardson here for the narrator, and I gather that name has some resonance in your own life, and I wonder if you can trust yourself to that.
I tend to use the names that have a certain kind of rhythm to it, and so far the only names that, or some of the names I've used were family names, because they seemed right, but they're not...
They're not about the people, the names are apart from it.
They have only kind of rhythmic resonance for me, a kind of meter.
And I didn't know what other name to really call a person from, that kind of person I was writing about from that part of the world.
I'm not so familiar with
I'm only familiar with these places through my family, so I tend to use family names.
So one should not infer anything from the use of that name, other than the fact that it was a convenient name for you to use?
Yes, that's right.
That's right.
I mean, because you certainly are... The people who read you critically have observed that you do write a lot of autobiographical... Autobiographical.
Yes, that's quite true.
And perhaps you could address yourself to that in the writing of this book.
Well, you know, the name, for instance, the name Lucy, there isn't anybody in my family named Lucy, but it derived from Lucifer.
And it, all of the myths attached to Lucifer, which I know primarily from Paradise Lost,
That was all part of her story, identifying with a rebellious character and being tossed out of paradigm and so on.
So the name Lucy made sense, but there's nobody I knew, no.
It's just that it made sense in that way.
But then her other names were my names.
But again, they had an explanation.
Well, that's superficial, too, I think.
But in the deeper sense of autobiographical writing, would you suggest that this is gone?
This particular one, no, because I'm not 70 years old.
Of course, yeah.
It's only autobiographical.
But, of course, the title of the autobiography of my mother, which we do get on the very last page, where you make clear why you use that title.
It could be somebody from your family.
I mean, just looking at it.
Yes, it could be.
It's autobiographical in the sense that I know, I've known women, a woman or women like that, but it's not in the real meaning of autobiography.
It's not me.
But I know the situation I wrote about very well.
I love the advice of the picture kind of emerging.
before prior to each chapter we see you know yeah we have it yeah and segments was this your idea yeah visually it really is quite a nice device isn't it she's quite brilliant it shows quite a quite an interesting reading of the of the novel i think so i think so yes it was um kind of amazing uh to see yeah and is this a photograph of a of a caribbean woman yes it is a woman actually i um it's a
a tourist postcard from Martinique, I think, of 1930.
Uh-huh.
And in your mind's eye, is this kind of what this woman... Do you visualize your characters?
Do you have visual images of them?
Oh, well, yes.
Oh, absolutely, yes.
She fits fairly close.
I wasn't thinking of that.
I've had that postcard for a long time.
Someone gave it to me on my 25th birthday, actually, with a present, and I kept it.
Yes, she's a person of, I suspect, an African, European, and Carib Indian background.
Her face looks familiar.
As a young woman, with a great body of work ahead of you, how was it for you to
characterize, I mean, to put yourself in the skin of a 70-year-old woman and to write from that kind of a perspective.
I'm just asking, you know, creatively.
Oh.
A creative question.
I mean, you don't mind if we don't get into the substance of the book too much.
That's my job, of course, to read it.
But we are just kind of going to look.
Yes.
How was it?
When?
It must have been quite a challenge, I would have to believe, or perhaps not.
Well,
I hope I'm not coming down with something.
It wasn't any more of a challenge than writing on the whole.
It was hard.
We're doing fine.
I'd just like to check myself.
Every once in a while I'd be very anxious about machines.
I know, everybody does.
But the difficulty wasn't that part.
The difficulty was just
getting the whole tone of it and the whole detail of it correct, and the voice correct, the sweep of it correct.
Because it has a sort of wide mythic sweep, but it's a very small book.
Speaking of the voice, when you started, did you see the voice?
Did you see the narration beginning?
from the standpoint of a 70-year-old woman recalling you in the events?
Oh, yes.
It began, yes.
Did the voice kind of come to you, or did you hear it, or...?
No, I was thinking about it.
The women I knew, who are my mother's age, and who are fairly impressive and powerful
women, and I just, you know, would mediate my way through many things to their voice.
But it wasn't, no, it didn't come to me.
I mean, it was a real process of elimination of thinking.
Do you see your body of work as a body of work?
No.
You don't.
No, because I wouldn't dream of thinking of myself in quite such a grand way.
I think others are.
Well, they can.
I'm very flattered that anyone would.
would see it that way, but I just, you know, I write one book, and I write another, and then I write another, and I'm sure they're all connected, because they're all written by the same person, and I'm sure they have similar themes, and even similar sentences, but I don't see it as one at all.
I couldn't, it would overwhelm me.
You don't see these books as statements, do you?
Let me put that in a final question.
Do you see these books as statements
beyond the fictional boundaries?
I mean, I have no doubt that they are, but I wouldn't be the one to see them that way.
I mean, the most I can do is write them, and then I hope people read them, and I'm very grateful if anyone thinks about them enough to
say anything intelligent about them but I sort of limit myself to writing and to thinking about writing and really I don't mean to sound overly modest because I'm not a modest person at all but I couldn't do that I couldn't think of myself as having a body of work or as a person of
you know, saying anything important.
I hope to say something.
I want to say something important.
I want to say something interesting.
But I'm not sure I do.
I'm very grateful if it seems so to people and if it makes sense to people.
I mean, it's my intention to.
But I...
I really couldn't defend my work.
I think you are being too wise.
But do you have a sense then of your reader, of who your audience is when you're writing?
No.
You don't?
I know, I mean, it's a very interesting thing.
I mean, I know some sort of basic rough things about my reader.
I know that my reader is not
are not the people I am from.
They're not people from a small island with a history of colonialism, because the people where I'm from do not really read.
It's not a literary place.
It's not like Ireland.
It's the people that I see.
I live in a society
where I'm read, but I do not write for or about those people.
So I'm in a bit of a puzzle here, and I'm in a bit of a strange situation.
But that's basically what I know about my readers, that they're not from a small island in the West Indies.
To make it even more strange or more human, really, because ideally this is the way human existence ought to be, most of the people who read me do not even look like me.
So it's... Well, I mean, is that... Do you think that... Are you suggesting that they're...
white people or African-American people or both?
I don't like to use those words because they're... But you brought it up, you said they don't look like me.
No, I... I'm just following up on that.
Yeah, but I didn't use those words.
Oh, you didn't, that's why I asked the question.
I only said they don't look like me in a certain way.
They tend to be mostly women, but they're not women of my complexion.
And I say this only because if I give a reading, for the most part, the people who show up
hear me read are not black women.
Really?
Yeah.
Does that surprise you?
Um, no, because I just take all of those things as, um, naturally, uh, you know, I grew up reading, um, and loved to read, um, Charlotte Bronte.
Well, Charlotte Bronte did not look like that.
Completely identified with Jamie and, um,
So why should anyone look like me be... Why should the people interested in my writing look like me?
I take it for granted that people are more interested in their other than they are in themselves, because I know I am.
Just by contrast, there's a piece in the New York Times a couple of days ago, this Terry McMillan book, which is now a film,
And how it's almost a phenomenon of how African-American women are almost going in groups to see the movie and to discuss it.
And if you talked about an audience, I would have to say it would be overwhelmingly female and black.
Yes, yes.
But of course, maybe there's a shared life experience there that she's talking about.
Apparently.
That is very common to particularly American, meaning the continental U.S.
Yeah.
But what you were writing about, of course, was not a shared experience.
That's right.
For the overwhelming majority of your readers, I would just say.
That would be... I almost never identify with popular or anything.
For instance, there was a movie called The Harder They Come, and it was about West Indians and
and I didn't particularly identify with it.
I almost wouldn't identify with something like that, but that's just me.
I would identify, I seem to, and it's perverse, I admit, almost always would identify with something other than a representative of myself.
I think I look for something
much more peculiar.
You're talking about now in terms of what you like to read.
And what I like to see, yeah.
Do you like movies?
I do, too.
I mean, I've got a young daughter who reads, but movies.
Yes.
It's a culture, I think.
Yes, yes.
Yeah, I get a little suspicious of... I would hate to have...
a movie represent me, or to feel a movie represent me.
That would be a little disturbing to me, but that's just me.
When you say, representing me, you mean your work?
No, no.
Myself, yes.
To look at a movie and say, boy, that's about me, let's all go see to having this shared experience.
That wouldn't be me, but no.
How about a film to represent your work?
Have there been films made of any of you?
No, and I'd be happy if someone did, because they'd pay me money, I think.
I hope.
I have no... No objections?
Not at all.
No reservations?
No, I mean, I've written the... I've done what I mainly aim to do, which is to write a book, and anything else would be...
Wonderful.
Yes, kind of gravy.
But it's not something I worry about.
I mean, the book is a book in any case, and we understand that when it goes to those people, it's a whole new existence and another work that's suggested by what you've written, not necessarily yet.
I'm trying to jump around like this.
Oh, not at all.
It's kind of fun.
Some of your work, or maybe even a lot of it, has been characterized as being angry work.
Do you agree with that?
Oh, no.
Of course, I'm reading some of these things in the feminist companion to literature, where they have these little...
Oh, really?
You probably know more about me than I know about myself.
Well, I try.
I do have a wonderful reference library, I have to say.
Oh, that's wonderful.
I've never seen The Feminist Companion.
Am I in The Feminist Companion?
You are, and you're also in this brand-new Oxford Companion to women, specifically women writers.
I am?
And it's quite a substantial...
Maybe I'll Xerox it and send you a copy of that.
No, I think I'll go and get it right now.
It's a new book.
It's an Oxford book.
Amazing.
But I did read in a good chunk of it in a small place, which is in an anthology, which is certainly, I think, you have to agree as an angry... Strangely, I don't agree.
Oh, good.
Okay.
That it's angry.
I think it's true.
And I don't understand why a true expression, the truth about something, would be anger.
It's not the expression that's angry.
It's the thing that's not.
Well, I mean, for instance, there's a quote, people like me cannot forgive and cannot forget.
Is that an expression of anger, or is it a statement of fact?
Yes, a fact.
It only seems angry
to someone who is not like me, and who might be afraid that such a statement is directed at them.
But I don't think it's angry at all, in any case, even if it was angry.
That's fine, too.
I mean, if you have a reason to be angry, I mean, it's a normal human emotion that responds to a situation.
Well, except, yes, except...
People use that to say that the thoughts I expressed in that book were unacceptable because they were angry, as if one could tell such a story in the form of what rhyming couplets or a jingle, how else could one say?
I think also the other thing is that
It always seems strange to me that no one ever really says a man who writes about anything is angry.
I don't remember, for instance, Soul on Ice being described as angry, or any book.
Really?
No, I've never heard Soul on Ice being described as angry.
It's been described as all sorts of things, but anger, if a woman expresses something, I think, on the whole, strongly, and it seems angry, then it's a condemnation.
It seems peculiarly wrong that a woman... Are you suggesting that there's still a form of prejudice that's applied to women who... I'm not suggesting, I'm stating clearly that I believe that.
And...
You know, I think that's a very valid point.
I mean, because in these descriptions that I've read, the word anger, I've got written right here.
It comes up again.
Well, I promise you to read reviews of Solon, I see what you do that.
That's really interesting.
And in one of the descriptions called it, I'm trying to find it, I wrote it down, polemical.
I mean, polemic.
But how would you respond to that?
It's strange.
You took it very...
I remember particularly someone in the New York Times just being so offended, must have been a young person, being very offended that this was written in the Sunday Times, as if I was robbing her of her little treat of two weeks or a weekend in January on a day like today.
Well, maybe she wrote it on a day like today.
I can see how.
one would object to not being able to go to a nice warm place on a day like today.
But then I thought, well, there, the book will just die the life of a book when it's not reviewed well.
But sure enough, it just goes on and on.
You mean that kind of reaction?
No, no, a positive reaction.
The book is not only still in print, it's taught all the time.
Now, which book is this?
A small play.
It's sold hundreds of thousands of copies.
Wonderful.
Yeah, I feel quite... Because it's just found an audience.
It finds new people who read it and say, you know, this is
It's just so true, and I'm... It's never stopped anyone from going on a holiday.
That wasn't the point.
The point was to make, as all of any writer does, is to make people think.
And we should point out that that's a non-fictional work as opposed to another work, which is largely fiction.
Friction, yeah.
But it found an audience.
Well, I should think it would be read in departments like this.
Like this, it's read in high schools.
It's read in travel literature.
It's read in all kinds of... I drive my daughter to school when I come to Boston and Cambridge today.
So she's in the eighth grade.
And she'll always ask me, well, what book are we doing today?
And I didn't tell you this.
And I said, she said, I like it a lot.
And I said, have you read any of Ms.
Kincaid's books?
She said, next year, which is ninth grade.
Yes.
And that must be very interesting, wouldn't you think?
Very gratifying for you that, you know, not just in specific-focused departments such as Afro-American departments here at Harvard.
Oh, no.
But in the ninth grade of Fay School, all over the world.
Oh, yes.
It's read in... I just got a...
A letter from someone I know in Colorado whose daughter is in the... Yeah, it's part of her reading list for high school.
By the time she graduates, she has to have read... Among the books she has to have read is Annie John.
So, yeah, it is widely read for...
I think mostly because there are very few books about young women, the experience of a young woman growing up.
I think that's probably what it is.
It's not, because, you know, it's not, if you remember, I mean, if you read it, it doesn't mention race at all.
It doesn't actually.
Well, it certainly suggests class, however.
It suggests all sorts of conflict, but, you see, I think race is a false idea, so I don't really deal with it.
Could you expand on that?
I think it's a shorthand way of saying something very violent, which is, I have power over you.
And the person who defines race is usually the person who can enforce something about it, who can make it work for them.
But the person who has no interest in race,
who's not interested in power doesn't come up with this construct.
It's just an invention to enforce your power.
And so I never talk about race.
I talk about the inflammatory thing, which is power.
Well, when you write about the country club on the island, for instance, where colonial British people have
eaten and played golf for three years, Europeans, and where people from the island cannot go, or they can remember the first time, anything.
Are we not talking about race here?
No, we're talking about power, what powerful group does what to the powerless group.
I think that when you start to talk about race,
You remove your, you become sort of obsessed with ethnic identities, which is what the racial definition wants you to do in the first place.
And you become protective of your group and disrespectful of that group and begin to see people only in terms of group, not whether they're doing something good or whether they're doing something bad.
And groups of people can do do bad things, and groups of people do do good things, but individuals also do good things, and individuals do bad things.
But the minute you start lumping people together, you fall into all sorts of, you're likely to fall into all sorts of moral abyss.
And also you can't solve, the problem is power.
always people are talking about power.
People are acting out of desire for power.
It's very easy to do what you want to do if you just organize people in groups.
That's the black group, that's the white group.
Then you just get to lop off their heads if you can, all of them, without thinking about human ramifications.
I don't believe in race.
I believe in that people do good things and people do bad things, and people are powerful and people are powerless.
You've lived in the United States, I think, for close to 30 years, probably.
You moved here in 57?
Yes.
And so you've been here certainly long enough to be a part of the, to have formed opinions of
or I hate to use the word opinions, but perceptions.
Yes.
How do you, and I hate to jump from your work to a perception of what's going on in this country now when we talk about, we don't use the word race, but look at the racial revisions that seem to have.
Oh, they only confirm.
Maybe they've just popped up to the floor.
They only confirm my point of view.
These
ideas that people think of themselves and each other as groups and not as what a person is.
And it's particularly weird in this society when different groups of people are so fluidly connected.
You know, it's true you have neighborhoods of this and neighborhoods of that, but people generally
quite go back and forth with each other, more so than in most places.
No, I just simply, living here, the longer I live here, confirm for me that this, you know, I mean, when you sort of, you want to see how absurd it becomes, if you, then you begin to look at something like the census in which people are asking for
another classification other than... This morning on the radio is coming in.
Oh, was it?
I didn't.
Yeah, on the radio this morning, on the news.
People who are not half black, half white, they don't want to be.
They want a category that says multiracial, as opposed to... And the liberals don't want it, and the conservatives don't want it, and for reasons that make sense.
But it's ridiculous, isn't it?
It is ridiculous.
It is completely ridiculous.
And that's, again, you know, a group of people sort of trying to carve out a place for themselves.
Everybody has a group.
Why not them?
You know, I did an interview just about a year ago on Martha's Vineyard with Dorothy West.
And I should also be pleased to send you a copy of it.
I'd love to.
Because it's been in 40 newspapers so far, and I've placed it everywhere.
what a wonderful, wonderful woman she is.
And I think she's spoken here at Harvard before.
But, of course, one of the themes that she writes about is people passing for her.
Blue eyes, her father had blue eyes.
And she said, you know, it's very easy to pass for her.
And, of course, if there's this perception of you of being white and not black, then maybe you can, it's very easy to transcend this
this power group picture, this classical picture that you see.
Yes.
But she's writing, of course, as a seven-year-old who lived through the Harlem Renaissance and really experienced things.
There's a wonderful book.
I think I've lent it to some student of mine by a woman named Jessie Fawcett called Plumban, in which...
It's about that, a girl, two girls, two sisters, one's very black and one's very light, and they pass.
The one passes, but they have to deny each other's presence.
But see, that's a word even that's in the language.
Pass.
Oh, yes, it is.
And it has a resonance, doesn't it?
It does.
Passing.
Yeah.
It's an American... It doesn't happen where I'm from.
Where I'm from, it's so small, everybody would know everything about you.
You live to pass for very long.
But anyway, I don't believe in it.
And it causes all sorts of strange things.
I never describe people as white or black.
I'll describe someone.
I'm not used to it, really.
But I live in a place in which people are often described.
In our family, we never describe people by race.
But when I try to describe someone to someone who, mostly an American person, if I never mention the color of the person, they assume it's a white person.
Yes, they assume that you only describe someone's
color if they're black, but if they're not, you feel that they're normal, that you don't need to.
Well, I would hate to use that word, normal.
Well, it's really quite true, but I don't know how to say someone is black, because I don't say I am black.
Well, you know, I have found, if you're talking like, for instance, something about my wife's doctor, who's a doctor who delivered children,
The assumption is that this doctor is a man.
Yes.
And guess what?
It's a woman.
A woman.
Yes.
Or I wrote in a book that I recently had published about that I wanted to maintain the anonymity of this particular person, the reasons that made sense to her.
I represented her at an auction in New York, so I wrote it in such a way that you didn't know whether...
this person was a man or a woman, because I figure if I say she, well, that eliminates the possibilities by 50%.
Yes.
So everybody assumed I was writing about a man, because only men have this kind of money to go to Sotheby's in New York and bid $250,000 on artworks or whatever.
Amazing.
And so everybody thinks I'm writing about a man when I'm writing about a woman.
But I think it's the same thing that you're talking about.
We have these perceptions.
Yes.
mindsets about people.
If they're accomplished and powerful, well, then they must be white or male, I guess.
Do you see yourself writing in any kind of a tradition, then, if you don't see your work as a body of work, as a corpus, but do you see yourself emerging out of any kind of a literary tradition?
Well, yes.
Yes, and it's an English tradition.
It's not American.
Yes.
Yes, I have an English cultural influence.
You know, I grew up on the British colonial rule, and that was my education, and that's my frame of literary reference.
I have one question.
Of course, you write a lot about the English colonial influence with, and some people might say anger, again, to go back to that word earlier, but it's not anger so much, in your view, as it is.
This is the way it is.
Yes.
And this is what happened.
Yeah.
And you would not describe it.
I mean, you talked about the visit to England, for instance.
Mm-hmm.
Show them the tie with the Prince of Wales.
Oh, yeah.
Poor Prince of Wales.
Yes, her... Self-image of... Right, her culture, yes.
Well, sadly, sorry.
Yeah.
Yeah, I was... Well, of course, you know, they just hadn't expected that, you know, people like me would have the same critical view of them that they had had of us.
It's like you weren't allowed to have them.
Oh, no, no, no.
They were perfect.
As a girl, did you sense that you had these creative writings?
I think so.
I was very depressed when I was young.
I think so, and I really couldn't do anything.
that one was supposed to do as a young woman.
So I think it must have been, I must have wanted to be what I am, but didn't know how it would be.
So I think it was, I must have.
I didn't know anyone who was an artist.
I didn't know anyone who wrote.
But there must be lots of people like me all over the globe, really,
want to do something, but have no voice.
Of course, you discovered this when you came to the United States, and you were, I guess, 18 or so when you came here.
And I think it was amazing how quickly, I mean, you were a very young woman when your first pieces began to be published.
How old was I?
I thought it would have been 25.
I suppose, of course, I felt so old.
I felt very old, yeah.
And speaking of the cold weather and where you're from, the warm weather, how in the world did you choose to move up to Vermont?
Oh, and everybody asks that.
But I love the contrast, and I sort of think of it as something worth enduring.
because what follows is so beautiful to me.
I love spring.
I love summer.
I've begun to really love fall.
I think I shall never love winter.
Well, it's pretty, though.
It loses its... Yeah, it's pretty, you know, but I think that you have to force the prettiness too much.
You say it's pretty, but...
There's something about it that pretty as it is.
There are things that are pretty that you want forever, and I don't think winter is one of them.
We're really quite pleased, aren't we, to see it?
Yes.
To see those first robins arrive.
Oh, absolutely.
And you think it's pretty, and it's really more of a consolation.
Well, at least it's pretty.
Than the forsythias.
Yes.
Oh, whatever.
That is wonderful.
The robins are wonderful.
The bulk is coming up.
The crocus is popping up.
Yes, yes.
And it really is a sense of renewal.
I mean, you want to go beyond the seasonal thing.
The symbolism of it is.
It's profound.
It's quite profound.
It really is a low time, a moribund time, if anything.
I could never live in the one climate again.
Really?
Yeah.
Well, that's interesting, isn't it?
because we all love the warm weather.
On the same radio broadcast I was listening to on the way in, they called somebody in Hawaii, where it was 80 degrees, you know, during the day and 70 at night.
But if only you could just have, you know, maybe just two weeks of it during the season.
If this was just some massive exchange, that would be nice.
But this is, yeah,
A mild winter, but apparently we might soon be having only mild winters.
Yeah, I don't... You don't think, you don't see it.
I haven't, I knew we would have a tough winter to see.
Yes.
I mean, they're talking a half a degree over the last, I don't think, in our lifetime.
I mean, I guess that's a lot in global terms, but... A farmer, I know, said it was going to be a very
snowy winter, even more so than the one before last.
And his indicator was that the trees had formed so many leaves because the earth needed to protect itself.
I thought that was a bit kind of odd.
I don't get that.
I don't see where that has anything to do with climate.
Well, I mean, you know how farmers are.
They think that, you know, but it seemed a bit too telepathic to me.
I didn't know nature could be so radioing.
It really telegraph its punches, too.
Yes, I know, tele-radioing the tree, saying, oh, more leaves, oh, more leaves, because it's going to be... Let's just talk a little bit, just come back to the book with his hand, and then I'll take my leaves.
I have an hour, and I'm going to extend my welcome.
Tell me, did you have the title for this book when you started it?
Because, you know, one of the recurring phrases that is a very powerful, repetitive phrase is, my mother died at the moment I was born, which obviously has to be the most central phrase I would suggest in the whole book.
And did you start with this conceptually?
Yes, I knew she was.
motherless.
I knew she was loveless.
And then on the other hand, she would be barren to her own doing.
Yes, she controls her life that way, that people don't like women to have, because I don't know why, men kill people all the time, actual people all the time, without
thinking about it and without being condemned for it.
In fact, they award each other medals for these incredible acts of murder.
But for a woman to make the tiniest gesture to give her life some shape that she might, that might be a comfort to her, the shape of her life, is condemned.
So I liked her having that sort of
you know, small, hollow victory over herself.
I knew that from the beginning.
I didn't necessarily read that as a victory, though, because she kind of gave it, she certainly thought about it later on in life, didn't she, about that decision, or maybe not?
She doesn't regret it.
It's a fait accompli?
Yes, it's not, well, it is a small, it is a victory, because it's,
something she wanted and accomplished.
And that she controlled as well.
Yes, it's a victory.
You may say all sorts of things about what kind of victory it is.
Well, and I'm not going to judge her either on that.
Well, no one can.
But it is, yeah, a victory.
It's her decision.
Yes, that's right.
Why that should be a big deal is a bafflement to me.
But this concept of my mother died at the moment I was born.
Yes.
And why is it repeated to me?
Well, because it's a central event to which any love
she felt she would have had in the world revolves around this central figure that was absent.
And it's the loss of love, or the entire absence of how to love.
I mean, there's a part in it, I think, where she says what makes a person being observed by loving eyes, being
She never had that, so that is repeated over and over.
Her mother dies, and she, as a mother, dies every time.
She doesn't allow her children to be born, and the mother they would be, or the progenitors they would be, dies also.
Do you consider this an ironic title in that
She knows nothing about her mother other than the fact that she died at the moment of her own birth.
No.
I'm not capable of irony, I don't think.
No, it's not ironic.
It's meant straight.
It's the life of her mother in her and the mother she's not also.
But when we talk of the word autobiography, it is the telling of a life.
No, it's the telling of a life.
And all she knows about this life is what she expresses in one sentence.
But she knows about her own life, and she is a mother who is not allowed, who has not allowed herself to be.
But also, I don't want to more.
I'm just having fun.
Oh, no, no.
I know I was going to be asked.
Everybody sort of.
Because it really is her own autobiography.
Yes.
And, yeah, she's a loveless mother.
I mean, she tells the story of her life, literally from, if not from conception, but from delivery to the present.
I mean, she does span 70 years.
Yeah, and she does conceive children.
That's right.
It makes her motherly, but not a mother.
Uh-huh.
So, yeah, it's correct.
It's correct.
The title is correct.
It's not ironic.
Okay.
I think it's wonderful.
Have I missed anything that we should talk about?
I don't think so.
I'm going to shut this up.
Would you inscribe this book for me?
It would really be great.
Just tell me briefly how long have you been here at Harvard?
Oh, this is the third fall semester I've been here.
I teach a course in creative writing and a literature course, various books I put together in some sort of theme, things I've read.
I really enjoy it.
I have wonderful students.
So you've been here for three years or so, and you do teach literature.
Yes, yes.
Oh, no, no, no.
I'm not a scholar.
We talk about reading, ideas in reading.
Actually, we've been reading lots of travel journals of explorers and plant hunters and how people name things, how people possess things.
We try to talk about names.
I'm interested in naming, because naming is a way of claiming something.
The person who names the things takes something specific about it, determines all sorts of things about it.
Well, that does apply, then, to your characters, doesn't it?
Yes, I suppose so.
To go back to the way we open.
Yes, exactly.
I think I have plenty of material.
Just, also, the choice of the name Jamaica Kincaid.
Oh, no.
Forget about it.
Has that been written about it?
I've talked about it so much, yes.
I'll find it then.
I'm just curious.
If only I'd known, I'd be asked this question.
I was trying to not make my parents know I was writing.
I changed my name, but they knew immediately.